---
layout: post
title:      "Why I decided to become a Programmer"
date:       2018-09-13 12:02:06 +0000
permalink:  why_i_decided_to_become_a_programmer
---


Well first, let me tell you a little bit about myself. I would characterize myself as a problem solving, scientist always looking to improve things, always thinking logically about how the world works and what I can do to make it better for every living being. I studied ecology and biology during my undergraduate education at Cornell University and hydrologic modeling and database management for my Master's degree at SUNY- College of Enviornmental Science and Forestry in Syracuse, NY. Even my high school, the Marine Academy of Technology and Enviornmental Science allowed me to experiment, research and engage in field data collection and analysis at an early age. The last thing, I'll leave you at for now, is that I have always carried around a book of inventions, my biggest dream was always to be an inventor.

What makes a good scientist, is being able to see patterns in nature and in data, to notice the subtle changes as they occur naturally and to be able to analyze that data with integrity and without bias. Kind of like Rubular- finding and analyzing patterns through regular expressions, this type of attention to detail both in the field, lab and managing extremely large databases directly to programming. I even learned R and SAS in grad school and used them as primary tools to statistically analyze watershed-scale climatic datasets and predict interactions at the surface-groundwater interface.

One of the main pitfalls of a career in strictly environmental science to me, in the workplaces that I encountered, was the lack of problem-solving capacity. Most of my time as a scientist, I collected and analyzed data, wrote reports about potential solutions and theories regarding trends. However, the workplaces that I encountered were isolated and lacked interdisciplinary minds. I’m not saying that scientists in general don’t create actual solutions, of course they do, but the environmental, ecological and hydrological organizations that I worked for were not structured to solve problems as their primary function. And if environmental solutions were proposed, they were very rarely more than a well thought-out report or ‘long term plan’ that could not readily address and take action to solve real world problems as they occurred. 

Again, as an environmental scientist, you take the world on your shoulders and feel like you need to solve every problem. You work to solve the problems that you can in your immediate community or wherever your workplace allows you to, but most problems feel extremely disempowering. You cleanup an oil spill, knowing that so many more spills will occur and you’re really only creating a short term solution. You rehabilitated a turtle and dolphin injured by boat propellers, knowing that this happens every day. The real overlying problems are simple, but human behaviors take generations and generations to change, so it's a very disempowering field of study. 

Whereas, in programming, the community is endless and the open source world can really tackle any problem. You could have a teenager and a lifetime programmer working together on the same problem across continents. Any field of study can be dramatically improved with the technology, pace and quality control built into programming design. Writing code is immediately satisfying, every action has a reaction and your code can be used again and again. You test your code, find what doesn’t work, and you make it work. Gratification is an important feature of a job and hobby and it’s important to recognize what types of jobs provide you with the most gratification. I found over time, that what mattered most to me, was working in an environment that was both collaborative, supportive, and empowering. I need to work with hard-working individuals who inspire me and work to solve problems every day. I realized that I need a career that allows me to create immediate solutions. I care about capacity and putting my efforts into things that will effect the most change. 

What I love most about my local programming community and women in tech groups is their support for each other. They meet regularly, help each other solve problems in their code or make their code more efficient and most of them also contribute toward the global open source community, solving problems with coders on other continents. So the inventor in me sees endless capacity and support in a coding world where anything is possible and I can be constantly challenged.

